Security+ Cheat Sheet



Symmetric

Algorithm

Cipher Type

DES

Block

3DES

Block

AES (Rijndael)

Block

Blowfish

Block

IDEA

Block

RC2

Block

RC4

Stream

RC5

Block

RC6

Block

CAST

Block

MARS

Block

Serpent

Block

Twofish

Block

Kerberos

SSL

Cipher*

Asymmetric - Non-repudiation

Rivest, Shamir & Aldeman Encryption Algorithm (RSA)

Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange

El Gamal Encryption Algorithm

Elliptic Curve Cryptography (ECC)

SSL – Handshake*

PKI

Kerbros

authentication server

security database

privilege server

Hash

Secure Hash Algorithm

SHA, SHA-1

Message Digest Series Algorithm

MD2, MD4, MD5

Key Strength symmetric vs asymmetric

64 bit symmetric key strength = 

512 bit asymmetric key strength

112 bit symmetric key strength = 

1792 bit asymmetric key strength

128 bit symmetric key strength = 

2304 bit asymmetric key strength

Remote Access

802.11, VPN, DUN (RADIUS, TACACS, TACACS+, SSL, Packet-level auth via
IPSec Layer3

Access Control

MAC, DAC and RBAC (Rule or Role)

Basic Network Security Devices

Firewalls

Packet Filtering (Layer3)

Proxy Service

   Circuit Level (Layer 3)

   Application level (Layer 7) 

Stateful Inspection  (Layer 7)

Routers

Forward packets between subnets

RIP, IGRP, EIGRP, OSPF, BGP, EGP, IS-IS

Switches

Segment broadcast networks

Ports

Port

Use

21

FTP – usually in DMZ

22

SSH

23

Telnet

25

SMTP

49

TACACS

53

DNS

67 & 68

DHCP

80

HTTP

110

POP3

143

IMAP4

161

SNMP

389 & 636

LDAP

443

HTTPS / SSL

UDP 1701

L2TP

TCP 1723

PPTP

	

Key Management and Certificate Lifecycle

Key Generation – a public key pair is created and held by the CA

Identity Submission – The requesting entity submits its identity to
the CA

Registration – the CA registers the request and verifies the
submission identity

Certification  - The CA creates a certificate signed by its own digital
certificate

Distribution – The CA publishes the generated certificate

Usage – The receiving entity is authorized to use the certificate only
for its intended use

Revocation and expiration – The certificate will expire or may be
revoked earlier if needed

Renewal – If needed, a new key pair can be generated and the cert
renewed

Recovery – possible if a vertifying key is compromised but the holder
is still valid and trusted

Archive – certificates and users are stored

Authentication

Kerberos – ticket based system, symmetric key KDC

CHAP – exchange of hashed values

Certificates used w/I a PKI for Asymmetric key

Username & Password most common

Token-based auth requires possession of token

Biometric authentication

Certificates

X.509 – User’s public key, the CA (Certificate Authority)
distinguished name, and the type of symmetric algorithm used for
encryption.

SSL

The Secure Sockets Layer Protocol has two parts. First, the SSL
Handshake Protocol establishes the secure channel. Next, the SSL
Application Data Protocol is used to exchange data over the channel. 6
Steps in the handshaking process.

ISAKMP

(Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol) used to
negotiate and provide authenticated keying material for security
associations in a protected manner

Authentication of peers 

Threat management

Security association creation and management Cryptographic key
establishment and management

Bell La-Padula access control model

SOAS

subjects

objects

access modes

security levels

Diffie-Hellman algorithm

a secret key exchange over an insecure medium without any prior secrets.

Intrusion Detection

active responses

collect additional information

change the environment

take action against the intruder

Based on Console and Sensor

IP Addresses

Class A

Class B

Class C

1-127

128-191

192-223

10.0.0.0

172.16.0.0 – 172.31.0.0

192.168.0.0

255.0.0.0

255.255.0.0

255.255.255.0

65,000

SQL

actions

objects

users

	

ATTACKS

DOS – Denial of Service

Smurf - Based on the ICMP echo reply

Fraggle - Smurf Like attack based on UDP packets

Ping Flood - Blocks Service through repeated pings

SYN Flood - Repeated SYN requests w/o ACK

Land – Exploits TCP/IP stacks using spoofed SYNs

Teardrop – An Attack using overlapping, fragmented UDP packets that
cant be reassembled correctly

Bonk – An attack of port 53 using fragmented UDP packets w bogus
reassembly information

Boink – Bonk like attack but on multiple ports

Backdoor

NetBus, Back Orifice

Spoofing

Process of making data look like it was from someone else

Man in the Middle

Intercepting traffic between 2 systems and using a third system
pretending to be one of the others

Replay attack 

posting of captured data

TCP/IP hijacking

session state is altered in a way that intercepts legitimate packets and
allow a third party host to insert acceptable packets.

Mathematical attacks 

(Key guessing)

Password guessing, brute force, dictionary attacks

guessing logons and passwords

Malicious Code

Viruses – Infect systems and spread copies of themselves

Trojan Horse – Disguise malicious code within apparently useful
applications

Logic Bombs – Trigger on a particular condition

Worms – Self replicating forms of other types of malicious code

Java and Active X control – Automatically executes when sent via email

Social Engineering

Manipulating people – the most vulnerable point in a network

Business Continuity Plan

risk and analysis

business impact analysis

strategic planning and mitigation

training and awareness

maintenance and audit

Documentation and security labeling

Virus

replication mechanism

activation mechanism

objective

Wireless

WAP model – based on www model – Client, Gateway and Original Server

WEP – Wired Equivalent Privacy

ESN ID 60018-060606-517311-30



Integrity - Assuring the recipient that a message has not been altered
in transit. ensures all data is sequenced, and numbered.

PPTP only works over IP.

Asymmetric encryption scheme relies on both the sender and receiver to
use different keys to encrypt and decrypt messages. Encryption and
authentication can take place without sharing private keys. encrypt
symmetric keys

The integrity of a cryptographic system is considered compromised if the
private key is disclosed.

WTLS (Wireless Transport Layer Security) provides privacy, data
integrity and authentication for handles devices in a wireless network
environment.

File encryption using symmetric cryptography satisfies authentication

The primary DISADVANTAGE of symmetric cryptography is key distribution.

SYN Flood - A network attack that misuses TCP’s (Transmission Control
Protocol) three way handshake to overload servers and deny access to
legitimate users.

When a user digitally signs a document an asymmetric algorithm is used
to encrypt hash results

Least privilege – need to know security basis.

Applying ingress filtering to routers is the best method to prevent ip
spoofing attacks.

MD5 (Message Digest 5) - A common algorithm used to verify the integrity
of data from a remote user through a the creation of a 128-bit hash from
a data input

Worms are self replicating, Trojans are not.

Message authentication codes are used to provide integrity.

False positive - Incorrectly detecting authorized access as an intrusion
or attack.

ICMP quoting - What fingerprinting technique relies on the fact that
operating systems differ in the amount of information that is quoted
when ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) errors are encountered

SSL - protocol typically used for encrypting traffic between a web
browser and web server. Available in 40 and 128 bit encryption.

IPSec - a popular VPN (Virtual Private Network) protocol operating at
OSI (Open Systems Interconnect) model Layer 3.

Digital signatures provide authentication and non-repudiation - not
confidentiality.

DAC (Discretionary Access Control) relies only on the identity of the
user or process. Each object has an owner, which has full control over
the object

Access controls that are created and administered by the data owner

MAC - Access controls based on security labels associated with each data
item and each user. use levels of security to classify users and data

DEN is not inferior to SNMP

Kerberos - Time synchronization services for clients and servers..

A malformed MIME (Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions) header can
cause an email server to crash.

Passive detection – analyzing log files after an attack begins.

the best defense against man in the middle attacks is strong encryption,
auth

Systems identified in a formal risk analysis process should be included
in a disaster recover plan.

Certificate policy - A PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) document that
serves as the vehicle on which to base common interoperability standards
and common assurance criteria on an industry wide basis.

Buffer overflow – sends more traffic to a node than anticipated.

Differential backup methods copies only modified files since the last
full backup

IM is a peer-to-peer network that offers most organizations virtually no
control over it. Most vulnerable to sniffing

Decentralized privilege management environment, user accounts and
passwords are stored on each individual server.

A FTP bounce attack is generally used to establish a connection between
the FTP server and another computer

Network Based IDS - a system for an internal network that will examine
all packets for known attack signatures.

Ping of Death Attack A network attack method that uses ICMP (Internet
Control Message Protocol) and improperly formatted MTUs (Maximum
Transmission Unit) to crash a target computer

By SSO, the authentication problem of multiple usernames and passwords
is addressed, browse multiple directories

PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) - the best technical solution for
reducing the threat of a man in the middle attack

Security controls may become vulnerabilities in a system unless they are
adequately tested.

The standard encryption algorithm based on Rijndael is known as AES.

misuse detection - Management wants to track personnel who visit
unauthorized web sites.

Hosting included in a SLA (Service Level Agreement) to ensure the
availability of server based resources rather than guaranteed server
performance levels

SSL uses an asymmetric key and operates at the session layer

RAID supports High Availability

Common Criteria - The defacto IT (Information Technology) security
evaluation criteria for the international community

Crime scene technician - Tag, bag, and inventory evidence

Extranet - allows a business to securely transact with other businesses

Controlling access to information systems and associated networks is
necessary for the preservation of their Confidentiality, integrity and
availability (Their CIA)

dual key pair - Using distinct key pairs to separate confidentiality
services from integrity services to support non-repudiation

Single Loss Expectancy  - SLE - is the cost of a single loss when it
occurs - compiling estimates on how much money the company could lose if
a risk occurred one time in the future.

Non-repudiation is generally used to prevent the sender or the receiver
from denying that the communication between them has occurred

Confidentiality - The protection of data against unauthorized access or
disclosure

Firewall to allow employees in the company to DL FTP – set outbound
port 23 allowed

SYN Attack – exploits in the hand shaking	Audit Log - A collection of
information that includes login, file access, other various activities,
and actual or attempted legitimate and unauthorized violations 

VLAN - originally designed to decrease broadcast traffic but is also
beneficial in reducing the likelihood of having information compromised
by sniffers

Active detection IDS systems may break off suspicious connections or
shut down the server or service

CRL and OCSP - two common methods when using a public key infrastructure
for maintaining access to servers in a network

IPSec Provides the Authentication Header (AH) for data integrity and
Encapsulation Security Payload (ESP) for data confidentiality. 

TCP SYN scan - used to see what ports are in a listening state and then
performs a two way handshake

NAT (Network Address Translation) can be accomplished with static and
hide NAT (Network Address Translation) and PAT (Port Address
Translation)

Due care - Policies and procedures intended to reduce the likelihood of
damage or injury

Business impact analysis - obtain formal agreement on maximum tolerable
downtime

Documenting change levels and revision information is most useful for
Disaster recovery

worm is able to distribute itself without using a host file

Single servers are frequently the targets of attacks because they
contain credentials for many systems and users

Multi-factor authentication may be needed when a stored key and
memorized password are not strong enough and additional layers of
security is needed

VPN Drawback - a firewall CAN NOT inspect encrypted traffic

man trap - physical access control most adequately protects against
physical piggybacking

LDAP directories are arranged as Trees

Data integrity is best achieved using a Message digest

minimum length of a password be to deter dictionary password cracks 8

CRL certificates that have been disabled before their scheduled
expiration.

logging - to keep a record of system usage

Security controls may become vulnerabilities in a system unless they are
adequately tested

RBAC Access control decisions are based on responsibilities that an
individual user or process has in an organization

The start of the LDAP directory is called the root

HAS encryption - 128 bits.

SSLv3.0 (Secure Sockets Layer version 3.0) added the ability to force
client side authentication via digital certificates

virus - replication mechanism, activation mechanism and objective

Hashed passwords subject to man in the middle attacks

*The Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) protocol uses both asymmetric and
symmetric key exchange. Use asymmetric keys for the SSL handshake.
During the handshake, the master key, encrypted with the receiver public
passes from the client to the server. The client and server make their
own session keys using the master key. The session keys encrypt and
decrypt data for the remainder of the session. Symmetric key exchange
occurs during the exchange of the cipher specification, or encryption
level.

PKI technical solution for reducing the threat of a man in the middle
attack

CRL (Certificate Revocation List) query that receives a response in near
real time does not guarantee that fresh data is being returned.

multi-homed firewall If the firewall is compromised, only the systems in
the DMZ (The main purpose of digital certificates is to bind a public
key to the entity that holds the corresponding private key

One of the factors that influence the lifespan of a public key
certificate and its associated keys is the Length of the asymmetric
hash.

In order for a user to obtain a certificate from a trusted CA
(Certificate Authority), the user must present proof of identity and a
Public key

What is the primary DISADVANTAGE of a third party relay Spammers can
utilize the relay.

The greater the keyspace and complexity of a password, the longer a
attack may take to crack the password brute force

The WAP (Wireless Application Protocol) programming model is based on
the following three elements Client, gateway, original server

What is a good practice in deploying a CA (Certificate Authority create
a CPS (Certificate Practice Statement).

What is the default transport layer protocol and port number that SSL
(Secure Sockets Layer) uses TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
transport layer protocol and port 443

What has 160-Bit encryption? SHA-1

Which of the following is typically included in a CRL certificates that
have been disabled before their scheduled expiration

DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) is most commonly accomplished by
multiple servers or routers monopolizing and over whelming the bandwidth
of a particular server or router.

IMAP4 requires port ____ to be open 143

During the digital signature process, hashing provides a means to verify
what security requirement data integrity

File encryption using symmetric cryptography satisfies what security
requirement Authentication

Which authentication protocol could be employed to encrypt passwords
CHAP (Challenge Handshake Authentication Protocol)

When User A applies to the CA (Certificate Authority) requesting a
certificate to allow the start of communication with User B, User A must
supply the CA (Certificate Authority) with User A’s public key only

Demilitarized Zone) are exposed

A common algorithm used to verify the integrity of data from a remote
user through a the creation of a 128-bit hash from a data input is MD5
(Message Digest 5)

ESN ID 60018-060606-517311-30



